# Nonlinear-Drivers-of-Land-Carbon-Sources-and-Sinks-with-Spatial-Effects-by-ExplainableGeoML
This repository contains computed raster and tabular LCS data, LCE data, driver data, and code for interpretable machine learning
# Abstract
Revealing the impact of socio-ecological factors on land carbon sources/sinks is the key to balancing ecological protection and economic development under the carbon neutrality goal. However, existing studies are limited by the separation of source-sink perspectives, insufficient dynamic interaction analysis, and the difficulty in simultaneously depicting spatial effects and nonlinear relationships, which restricts the in-depth understanding of the driving mechanism. Based on estimated land carbon emissions (LCE) and land carbon sinks (LCS) in Yunnan central urban agglomeration (YNUA), this study incorporated geographic coordinates (GEO) as spatial features and applied an explainable geospatial machine learning (XGeoML) model that integrates LightGBM and GeoShapley. This model was used to systematically examine the nonlinear driving mechanisms from four perspectives: importance and directionality, threshold effects, interaction effects, and spatial effects. The results revealed that (1) LCE continued to rise but at a decelerating rate, while LCS showed an overall declining trend with fluctuation. Both exhibited significant spatial clustering. (2) Human activities, climate, and vegetation factors jointly explained over 65% of the spatiotemporal variation in LCE and LCS, with the independent influence of GEO surpassing that of most driving factors. (3) The influence of socioeconomic factors varied with the stage of urban development. Natural ecological factors exhibited multi-threshold nonlinear responses, and landscape pattern optimization supported emission reduction and sink enhancement. Significant dynamic interactions were observed among the factors. (4) From the local scale, GEO not only directly shaped the spatial pattern of LCE and LCS but also modulated the intensity and direction of other factors, demonstrating a clear spatial regulatory effect. This study emphasizes the necessity of incorporating nonlinearity and spatial effects into carbon management and provides a scientific basis for precise regional emission reduction and sink enhancement.
# Folders
rster-data：LCS, LCE and driver data for 2002–2022;
table-data：Tabular data on LCS, LCE and drivers for ExplainableGeoML, and sample points used to validate the accuracy of the NPP;
code：Includes evaluation and validation of the main model, summary plots, partial dependence plots, interaction plots, and threshold-based validation;
Geoshapleyspatialresults：Results of the effect decomposition;
ENVIplugin：NPP calculation plug-in for the CASA model;
